---
layout: post
title:  Pointers
date:    2017-04-18
excerpt: Here's some pointers about pointers!
image: /assets/img/covers/pointers.jpg
tag:
  - Go
---

I wrote this for myself to better understand pointers but perhaps someone else may find it just as useful. I found that most mentions just kinda glossed over them because they're "easy".

It's true that they're not hard but they didn't really click until I wrote out in depth what's going on.

This example uses Go but you should be able to translate it into your language of choice. `func` is just a function and `fmt.Println` is, y'know, `console.log()` in Javascript or `print()` in Python. That's all there is specific to go.

The rest onwards is unedited:

In their simplest form, a pointer references a value within a computer program via its memory address. That is to say, it doesn't copy the original value but actually alters the original value directly.
​

It should be noted that they exist in a bunch of languages but for this exercise, let's start with a small program written in Go.
​
```go
package main
​
import "fmt"
​
func setToZero(copyOfValue int) {
  copyOfValue = 0
}
​
func main() {
  value := 1
  setToZero(value)
  fmt.Println("value:", value)
}
​
// value: 1
```
​
So, you might be thinking we've set value to 1, we pass it into a function which sets it to 0 and then we get the result of 0 but it's not quite that simple.
​

When the setToZero function is evaluated, it doesn't receive the actual original value variable but rather, a **copy** of it. This copy is set to `0` and then thrown away.
​

This is where pointers come into play. Instead of passing in the value, which gets copied, we pass in a reference to where the original value variable is stored in memory.


This is called **referencing**. That is, we're quite literally passing in a **reference** to the memory address that `value` is stored at. The reference `points` to where the value is stored, hence the name.
​
```go
package main
​
import "fmt"
​
func setToZero(pointerToValue *int) {
  *pointerToValue = 0
}
​
func main() {
  value := 1
  setToZero(&value)
  fmt.Println("value:", value)
}
​
// value: 0
```
​
There's two main bits to pointers. The reference, which we can see as `&value` points to the memory address of the original `value` as stated before. The received pointer, within the `setToZero` function is prefixed with a `*` to denote a pointer. 

All we need to do is change the expected type, `int` in this case to expect an `*int` pointer. We can then freely alter the value at the pointers memory address by prefixing our new variable name with an `*`.
​

To better understand what's happening behind the scenes, we can print out the values of `pointerToValue`, `*pointerToValue` and `&value`.
​
```go
package main
​
import "fmt"
​
func setToZero(pointerToValue *int) {
  fmt.Println("ptrToValueDereferenced:", *pointerToValue)
  fmt.Println("ptrToValueInside:", pointerToValue)
}
​
func main() {
  value := 1
  setToZero(&value)
  fmt.Println("ptrToValueOutside:", &value)
  fmt.Println("actualValue:", value)
}
​
// ptrToValueDereferenced: 1
// ptrToValueInside: 0x1040a124
// ptrToValueOutside: 0x1040a124
// actualValue: 1
```
​
Let's break it down in really tiny steps:
​

We pass `&value`, a pointer to the memory address of the value variable into our `setToZero` function. The value of `&value`, our pointer, is simply the memory address `0x1040a124`.
​

On the inside of the function, `pointerToValue` is now exactly the same as our initial `&value` pointer. It too, is just the location of the `value` variable in memory.
​

Next, we **dereference** our pointer using an asterisk. Our **dereferenced** pointer is now the actual value, rather than the location of the value. Notice that it's value is now `1`?
​

If we were to update the value, eg; `*pointerToValue = 2`, then the value at that address gets updated.
​

Now, that wasn't so hard, was it! If it still doesn't make sense, try using these examples in the [Go Playground](https://play.golang.org/) or using pointers in whichever language you're ultimately using.


If I got something wrong, seeing as I have exactly 15 minutes experience with pointers (there abouts) as of writing, feel free to complain via [email](mailto:marcus@thingsima.de) or [Twitter](https://twitter.com/sentreh).